```
---
layout: post
title: "Dev Diary (August 2016)"
author: "Corey Montella"
tags: []
---
```

### Platform

#### Syntax Highlighting

#### Syntax Adjustments

#### New Function Syntax

#### Bug fixes 

#### Pixels

#### Modules

We've taken a first pass at a module system.

### Eve + Markdown

Lately, we've been focusing on explaining Eve's programming model in relation to the developer syntax. After all, Eve's semantics are very new to most people, so we want to make sure the fundamentals are understandable before we start talking about their implications.

One key pillar of the Eve programming model is that order of statements doesn't matter. In typical imperative programs, statements are executed in the order they are written. In Eve, statements are executed as their supporting data becomes available. This is the key difference between the dual execution paradigms of control-flow and data-flow. 

The implication of this is that we can write code in an order that makes sense for a human, as opposed to writing code in an order that is enforced by the compiler or runtime. This is the basis for literate programming, introduced by Knuth in the 80s.

### Community

### Issues + PRs

#### RFCs

The syntax RFC received a lot of [activity](https://github.com/witheve/rfcs/issues/4) this month, specifically related to the names of certain keywords and syntax elements.

#### Documentation

#### Public Slack Channel

We launched a public Slack channel, witheve.slack.com! We're pretty good about responding to the mailing list, but sometimes you need real-time communication when trying to debug an issue or understand a concept. We'll be hanging out on this channel 9am-5pm PST, ready to answer your questions. Hopefully as the community grows, we'll have people here 24/7 who can help you out. Until then, we'll do our best to answer any questions you have.