# Eve Scouts

We often talk about programming languages is terms of technical characteristics. Is the language compiled or interpreted? Strongly or weekly typed? Functional or procedural? Imperative or declarative? 

But there's a whole other dimension to programming languages, relating to the more human aspects of their design. How approachable is the syntax? How are errors handled? What is the debugging workflow? In other words, there is the core language, and then there are the tools, documentation, and community supporting the language. As developers, the latter can often be as great a concern as the former. 

I recently stumbled upon a [post](http://notes.willcrichton.net/programming-languages-as-boy-scouts/), in which the author characterizes programming language design within the context of the code of conduct of the Boy Scouts of America. He argues that aside from technical considerations, programming languages should aspire to be trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave, clean, and reverent. Reading through the post, I realized that we hold some of the same principals for Eve, so I thought I would see how well Eve actually fits into this framework.

### Trustworthy 

> able to be relied on as honest or truthful

Eve is a full stack language; we provide everything you need to build a working application, including a database to manage persistent state. In fact, Eve and the Eve DB are (forever bound and tied together. Married?). This means if you're working with Eve, you're working with our database, so you need to trust us with your data.

### Loyal

> giving or showing firm and constant support or allegiance to a person or institution

Eve is loyal to humans, not the machine. 
 
The history of programming languages is riddled with decisions forced by limitations in technology.  
80 lines 
Trailing semicolons

Now in 2016, we are still dealing with the consequences of many of these early decisions

### Helpful 

> giving or ready to give help

Talk about how eve is helpful with errors and providing information

### Friendly

> kind and pleasant

Talk about the community here

### Courteous 

> polite, respectful, or considerate in manner.

### Kind 

> having or showing a friendly, generous, and considerate nature

Open source 
Open development 
Rfcs

### Obedient 

> submissive to another's will

No side effects. In some languages, you can never be sure of the effects of calling a function. Will it do what you want, or will there be some unknown side effect that you didn’t take into account? 
 
Eve is referentially transparent, meaning that…

### Cheerful 

> causing happiness by its nature or appearance

### Thrifty 

> using resources carefully and not wastefully

Eve programs are shorter than other languages. Do more with less.

### Brave 

> showing courage

Eve takes many principled stands on issues of design. This takes guts 

### Clean 

> having a simple, well-defined, and pleasing shape

Uncluttered syntax, sparse design, elegant semantics

### Reverent 

> feeling or showing deep and solemn respect

We won't try to be too smart. 
 
Sure we take a hard stand on the programming model, but otherwise we are very flexible. Unicode, schemaless DB